## beginnings

starts w/ shoes

- there was no transit until 19th century
- sedan chairs (carried litters) for the extremely wealthy
- uber wealthy used horse-drawn carriages

early taxi cabs were horse drawn & still way too expensive for nearly everyone

as a result, through the 1800s cities were always laid out with walking as a
priority

around 1824 in paris, someone invented a "bus" drawn by horse. like a
stagecoach, but for inner city local transit instead of long distance. didn't
require pre-arranged tickets

caught on really fast, omnibus (citizen's line coach) operated in chicago in
the 1840s (considering chi founded in 1830s, thats really really fast).

old long distance rail union station where merch. mart is now, had many
omnibuses waiting outside it.

## street cars

eventually, someone innovated & made the first "light rail" by running a
horsedrawn car on steel rails in the city streets. built all over chicago. so
important that they ran immediately after the great 1871 fire, even while the
ruins were still smoldering.

why so important? because the city had already expanded beyone the ability of
walking.

the power & influence over city development is obvious in the affect the street
car has on real estate booms of the time. i.e. a streetcar line was built along
lincoln up to southport before houses even were there, soley for the purpose of
selling lots in an as-yet unrealized development.

## elevators

first chicago building: 6 story hotel grand something? opened october 8th, 1871
then burnt down in the great fire the next day. rebuilt right after again 6
stories tall & w/ elevator; however now there were many others as chicago was
rebuilt.

i.e. Michigan Ave right after fire had many tall buildings w/ elevators that
people could access by streetcar easily.

this formula of `street cars + elevators` yielded much higher density which
yielded more tall buildings which yielded more street cars & elevators,
starting self-reinforcing cycle. this wasn't all good then as it meant huge
traffic, sanitation, public health, & other problems.

i.e. there was a huge pandemic affecting horses in the 1870s

## street cars 2.0

these problems began to lead to another new invention: steam engines + street
cars to remove horses.

first versions scared the horses still used; so they didn't take off.

eventually (1880s), they adopted the cable car already popular in SF by removing
the steam engine from the train, placing it instead at the end of the line. then,
the steam engine pulled on a long cable that ran under the tracks which the
train could then grab onto to propel itself.

cable cars gave us the name of "the loop" as the first transit loop was state
street to wabash of cable car lines through the central business district.

while only used in the busiest street car lines, chicago had the largest cable
car system in the world. other cities started their own in the late 1880s/early
1890s, but they never caught up before the next iteration gained popularity.

eventually these ushered in such density increases that traffic became the
limiting factor.

## entre "the el"

vision began as the Migs monorail (from Mike McDonald) in the 1890s; however
the original El beat it to reality & was built first. on what is today the
green line, the first El was a steam engine on elevated tracks to bring people
from central chicago to the world's fair.

with construction of the metropolitan west (today's Pink) line came the first
electric version. street cars were quickly electified as well (beginning in the
late 1890s).

original el lines all stopped outside downtown; functioning just as feeders to the CBD. first downtown line was the Lake Street line from Mike McDonald.

consolidated elevated loop idea introduced by ??, starting w/ adding a branch
from Lake along Wabash, but met fierce resistance from business property owners
who grew to dislike the elevated downtown line after construction of the lake
st line. eventually, they allowed it after enough owners were bribed (to the
tune of a few thousand dollars per mile). to do the next side along Wells, cost
a few 100 thousand per mile due to bribes to get permission. to finish it along
van buren, bribes would've cost a few million; however ?? got tricky and
proposed it instead as a line from wabash past franklin all the way out to
harlem, making the CBD property owners a minority who were outvoted by the
other owners. in the end, the non-loop portion was never intended to be built
and was just a means to outvote the opposed owners downtown.

## subways

early underground trains were built through chicanery--a contractor had
permission to build tunnels under nearly every downtown street to carry
telephone lines; however, he went further & added train tracks. the intention
was to charge for commercial freight traffic, moving it w/out having to deal w/
aboveground traffic.

while he got in a lot of trouble, the idea proved to be invaluable. every
business used it extensively, plus mail delivery, construction supply, & even
demolition of buildings used it to carry out debris.

these tunnels still exist today, although not all are mapped & well known. in
1992, contractors working on the Kenzie st. bridge were driving piles & hit an
unmapped tunnel, opening the system to the river. this caused a flood through
all prewar buildings, up to their first or second basement level, bringing with
it power failures & tons of damage.

In the late 1930s, the first passenger subway (the modern State St. line)
started construction in 1938 & was opened to the public after ww2 delays
(although they still had priority materials as it was considered part of the
war effort). by this time, however, transit was already in decline due to the
introduction of the automobile. in the 30s/40s, the CTA was created & all
private lines were consolidated to gov. ownership to save them from closing so
they wouldn't close due to inability to make a profit.
